Update ICP related documentation with ICP 2.x release (#2253)
wso2/docs-mi: en/docs/install-and-setup/install/adding-observability-for-icp.md

> # Adding Centralized Observability in the Integration Control Plane

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Add Centralized Observability in the Integration Control Plane
```

Reviewer: Let's check other places too.

# Add Centralized Observability in the Integration Control Plane

ICP provides centralized observability for MI runtimes. Application logs and per-request analytics are collected via Fluent Bit, stored in OpenSearch, and displayed in the ICP Console.

## Architecture

<a href="{{base_path}}/assets/img/integrate/observability/observability-icp.png" class="glightbox"><img src="{{base_path}}/assets/img/integrate/observability/observability-icp.png" alt="ICP observability architecture diagram showing log and metrics flow from MI through Fluent Bit to OpenSearch and ICP Console" width="1000"></a>

1. MI writes application logs to `wso2carbon.log` with an `[icp.runtimeId=<uuid>]` suffix on each line.
2. MI writes per-request analytics to `synapse-analytics.log` as JSON lines prefixed with `SYNAPSE_ANALYTICS_DATA`.
3. Fluent Bit tails both files and ships each to its own OpenSearch index.
4. ICP Server queries OpenSearch (filtering by runtimeId) when a user opens Logs or Metrics in the Console.

## Prerequisites

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Component</th>
      <th>Purpose</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>

>       <td>OpenSearch 2.x</td>

Reviewer: Shouldn't we mention how to setup Open search. In there we can mention the version

      <td>Log and metrics storage</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>

>       <td>Fluent Bit 3.x</td>

Reviewer: Shouldn't we mention how to setup Fluent bit. In there we can mention the version

      <td>Log collection and forwarding</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>ICP Server 2.0.0+</td>
      <td>Observability API layer</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>

>       <td>MI 4.4.0+</td>

Reviewer: We can simply say the MI server, as no need to say the version here.

      <td>Runtime with ICP heartbeat and analytics support</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## Step 1: Deploy OpenSearch

> Any single-node or clustered OpenSearch deployment works. ICP needs HTTP(S) access to the OpenSearch REST API.

Reviewer: Let's point to any document on how to setup Open search. or else I guess we should give steps.

Note the host, port, and credentials — you will configure them in ICP Server and Fluent Bit.

## Step 2: Create Index Templates

Apply index templates before any data arrives to ensure correct field mappings.

### Application logs template

The `time` field must accept the timestamp format MI produces (`2026-04-29 12:01:22,874`). Add a custom date format alongside the defaults:

```bash
curl -X PUT '<opensearch-host>:9200/_index_template/wso2_mi_application_log_template' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{
    "index_patterns": ["mi-application-logs-*"],
    "template": {
      "mappings": {
        "properties": {
          "time": {
            "type": "date",
            "format": "yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss,SSS||strict_date_optional_time||epoch_millis"
          },
          "message":        { "type": "text" },
          "icp_runtimeId":  { "type": "keyword" }
        }
      }
    }
  }'
```

> If your OpenSearch requires authentication, add `-u admin:<password>`. For HTTPS with self-signed certs, add `-k`.

Reviewer: Isn't this only for testing? If so, it is better to mention this. And I guess we should mention/ direct to add more secured options for production usage.

### Metrics index — no template needed

> Do **not** create an explicit template for `mi-metrics-logs-*`. OpenSearch's dynamic mapping auto-maps `icp_runtimeId` as `text` with a `.keyword` subfield, which is what ICP Server's metrics queries require.

Reviewer: What will happen if they create a template? Im wondering whether we can change the tone of this statement.
```suggestion
Do **not** create an explicit template for `mi-metrics-logs-*`. OpenSearch dynamic mapping automatically maps `icp_runtimeId` as `text` with a `.keyword` subfield, which is required by ICP Server metrics queries.
```

!!! note
    The app logs template must map `icp_runtimeId` as `keyword` (ICP queries it with a bare `terms` filter). The metrics index must keep the dynamic mapping (`text` + `.keyword` subfield) because ICP's metrics aggregations use `icp_runtimeId.keyword`. Applying an explicit `keyword` mapping to the metrics index will break the Metrics page.

## Step 3: Configure ICP Server

Add the OpenSearch connection to `<ICP_HOME>/conf/deployment.toml`.

> **These lines must appear before any `[section]` header** (lines starting with `[`). Place them at the top of the file:

Reviewer: This should be added as a note. However, shouldn't it something we need to fix?

Author: This is due to how toml parsers process tables. I don't think we can fix this.
I'll add as a note.

```toml
opensearchUrl = "https://localhost:9200"
opensearchUsername = "admin"
opensearchPassword = "<your-opensearch-password>"
```

If OpenSearch is running without TLS (e.g. with the security plugin disabled), use `http://`:

```toml
opensearchUrl = "http://localhost:9200"
```

!!! warning

>     The ICP config file ships with these keys commented out near the bottom of the file, after `[ballerina.http.traceLogAdvancedConfig]`. **Do not uncomment those lines.** Because they fall under a `[section]` header, Ballerina treats them as section-scoped values and rejects them. Always add the OpenSearch keys before the first `[section]` header.

Reviewer: This is not clear. And anyone can wonder why the ballerina config all of a sudden

Author: This statement is not valid anymore. We can remove this section.

Restart ICP Server after saving. Look for this log line to confirm:

```text

> level=INFO module=wso2/icp_server message="OpenSearch client initialized successfully"

Reviewer: Is this the one appear in the .log file. It is better to add the line from the .log file.

Author: This is the actual log line from icp.

```

## Step 4: Configure MI

Three changes are needed in the MI runtime.

### 1. Enable analytics in `deployment.toml`

```toml
[mediation]
flow.statistics.enable=true
flow.statistics.capture_all=true

[analytics]
enabled = true
```

> `flow.statistics.enable` activates mediation flow statistics collection. Without it, `[analytics]` has no data to publish.

Reviewer: We can remove this line.

    Time_Format %Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S,%L
    Time_Keep   On

[MULTILINE_PARSER]
    Name          mi_multiline
    Type          regex
    Flush_timeout 1000
    Rule          "start_state"  "^(?:TID:\s*)?\[[\d]{4}-[\d]{2}-[\d]{2} [\d]{2}:[\d]{2}:[\d]{2}"  "cont"
    Rule          "cont"         "^(?!(?:TID:\s*)?\[[\d]{4}-[\d]{2}-[\d]{2} [\d]{2}:[\d]{2}:[\d]{2})"  "cont"

[PARSER]
    Name        mi_metrics_json_extract
    Format      regex
    Regex       SYNAPSE_ANALYTICS_DATA\s+(?<json_str>\{.*\})(?:\s+\[icp\.runtimeId=(?<icp_runtimeId>[^\]]+)\])?

[PARSER]
    Name        json
    Format      json
    Time_Keep   Off
```

The multiline parser joins Java stack traces with the preceding log line.

Key details in `mi_log_parser`:

- **`(?:TID:\s*)?`** — some MI log lines have a `TID:` prefix before the timestamp (early startup lines). The prefix is optional.
- **`(?<message>.*?)`** — lazy match so it stops before the optional runtimeId suffix.
- **`(?:\s+\[icp\.runtimeId=(?<icp_runtimeId>[^\]]+)\])?`** — extracts `icp_runtimeId` from the `[icp.runtimeId=<uuid>]` suffix appended by the log4j2 pattern. ICP uses this field to filter logs by runtime.

### Lua enrichment (optional)

> A Lua script can enrich records with metadata fields (`product`, `service_type`) and generate hash-based deduplication IDs. See `icp_server/resources/observability/opensearch-observability-dashboard/config/fluent-bit/scripts.lua` for the reference implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Lua script can enrich records with metadata fields (`product`, `service_type`) and generate hash-based deduplication IDs. See `<ICP_SERVER>/resources/observability/opensearch-observability-dashboard/config/fluent-bit/scripts.lua` for the reference implementation.
```

   Read_from_Head   On

[FILTER]
   Name  grep
   Match mi_metrics_raw
   Regex log SYNAPSE_ANALYTICS_DATA

[FILTER]
   Name         parser
   Match        mi_metrics_raw
   Key_Name     log
   Parser       mi_metrics_json_extract
   Reserve_Data Off

[FILTER]
   Name         parser
   Match        mi_metrics_raw
   Key_Name     json_str
   Parser       json
   Reserve_Data On

# ── Outputs ──
[OUTPUT]
   Name               opensearch
   Match              mi_app_logs
   Host               localhost
   Port               9200
   Logstash_Format    On
   Logstash_Prefix    mi-application-logs
   Replace_Dots       On
   Suppress_Type_Name On
   tls                Off
   HTTP_User          admin
   HTTP_Passwd        <password>

[OUTPUT]
   Name               opensearch
   Match              mi_metrics_raw
   Host               localhost
   Port               9200
   Logstash_Format    On
   Logstash_Prefix    mi-metrics-logs
   Replace_Dots       On
   Suppress_Type_Name On
   tls                Off
   HTTP_User          admin
   HTTP_Passwd        <password>
```

Replace `<MI_HOME>` with the actual MI installation path. Use forward slashes on Linux, backslashes on Windows.

> **Output plugin**: Use `opensearch` (the dedicated OpenSearch output plugin).

Reviewer: Where do we configure this?

Author: it's configured as the [output] Name above. I'll change the text to make it clear.
